New Google Gemma 4B update. Google just
dropped a brand new AI model. It
translates 55 languages. It runs right
inside your browser. No internet, no
cloud, no servers. And honestly, this
one is kind of insane. Let me show you
everything. So, here is what just
happened. Google released something
called Translate Gemma. And the version
we care about is the 4B model. Now, why
do we care? Because this thing runs
entirely in your browser. No app to
download, no server to connect to,
nothing. It just works on your computer
right now. And look, I know we hear
about new AI models every single week,
but this one is actually different. And
I am going to show you exactly why in a
second. But first, you need to
understand what this change is. Because
this is not just a cool demo. This is a
shift in how AI apps get built. Period.
Let me break it down real simple. Before
this update, if you wanted AI
translation, you had to use something
like Google Translate or you had to
connect to some cloud API. Your text
gets sent to a server. The server
processes it, sends it back, and
somewhere along the way, your data is
sitting on someone else's computer. That
is how it worked every single time. Now,
with Translate Gemma 4B, that whole
process is gone. The AI runs directly on
your device. Your words never leave your
computer. Nobody sees your data. Nobody
stores your data. It is completely
private. And it works even if you turn
off your Wi-Fi. Think about that for a
second. Hey, if we have not met already,
I am the digital avatar of Julian
Goldie, CEO of Goldie Agency. Whilst he
is helping clients get more leads and
customers, I am here to help you get the
latest AI updates. Julian Goldie reads
every single comment. So, make sure you
drop one below. Let us get back into it.
So, Translate Gemma, what actually is
it? It is a family of translation models
from Google built on top of Gemma 3. And
it comes in three sizes. You got the 27B
model. That is the big one. That is for
cloud GPUs, heavy stuff. Then you got
the 12B model that is for laptops. Still
pretty powerful. And then you got the 4B
model. That is the one that changes
everything because it is small enough to
run on your phone, in your browser, on
edge devices,
anywhere.
And here is the wild part. The 12B model
actually beats the larger Gemma 327B
baseline on translation benchmarks. Let
me say that again. The smaller model
beats the bigger model. That is how well
Google trained this thing. And even the
tiny 4B model performs competitively
while being light enough to run on
basically anything. Now, how does it
actually work in the browser? Two words,
web GPU and Transformers.js version 4.
WebGPU is a new technology that lets
your browser tap into your GPU, your
graphics card, the same thing that runs
your video games. Now it runs AI
directly in the browser. No plugins, no
installs, just raw speed. And
transformers.jsv4 is a new update from
hugging face. It is a JavaScript library
that lets you run AI models right in the
browser with web GPU acceleration and it
can deliver up to four times the speed
compared to older versions. So we are
not talking about some slow laggy
experience. This is fast. Real fast.
Now, let me tell you why developers are
losing their minds [clears throat] over
this and why you should care even if you
are not a developer. Think about a
travel app. You're in another country.
You do not speak the language. You pull
out your phone, open a browser, and
boom, you can translate anything. Menu,
street signs, conversations, all without
internet, all without your data going
anywhere. That is real. That is possible
right now with this model. Or think
about a business that handles sensitive
documents, legal stuff, medical stuff,
private stuff. Before you had to send
that to a cloud to translate it. Now you
can translate it locally on your own
machine. Nothing leaves, nothing gets
stored, nothing gets leaked. And if you
are someone who builds AI tools or you
want to start using AI to grow your
business, this is exactly the kind of
update you need to know about because
the people who understand these shifts
early are the ones who win. Speaking of
which, if you want to learn how to use
AI tools like Translate Gemma and dozens
of other cuttingedge AI systems to
automate your workflows and scale your
business, check out the AI profit
boardroom. Link is in the description.
Is the best place to learn how to use AI
automation to get more customers and
save hundreds of hours. We go deep on
stuff like this every single week and
the community in there is next level.
All right, let us keep going because
there is more to this model that most
people are not talking about. Translate
Gemma does not just translate text. It
translates text inside images. Yeah, you
read that right because it is built on
Gemma 3 which is multimodal. It can look
at a photo and translate the text in
that photo. Street signs, restaurant
menus, screenshots, documents. You take
a picture, it translates it in the
browser offline. No cloud. That is huge
for travel. That is huge for business.
That is huge for accessibility. People
who speak different languages can now
communicate through images without any
internet connection, without any third
party seeing their data. Now, let me
talk about how Google actually trained
this thing because the training process
is really clever. They used a two-stage
approach. Stage one was supervised
learning. They trained the model on
human translations plus synthetic
translations generated by Gemini. So,
the model learned from both real human
translators and AI generated examples.
that gives it a massive amount of
training data. Stage two was
reinforcement learning. They optimized
the model using translation quality
metrics, things like metric X and
AutoMQM. Basically, they kept pushing
the model to produce more fluent and
more accurate translations over and over
until it got really really good. And
across all 55 languages, error rates
dropped. Not just for the big languages
like English and Spanish. Even for
smaller, less common languages, the
quality went up across the board. That
matters because a lot of translation
tools are terrible at smaller languages.
This one is not. Now, let us zoom out
for a second because this is part of a
way bigger trend in AI. And if you are
not paying attention to this trend, you
are going to fall behind. The trend is
local AI. AI that runs on your device
instead of in the cloud. We are seeing
it everywhere. Apple is doing it. Open
source models are doing it. And now
Google is doing it with translate Gemma.
Why does this matter? Three reasons.
One, privacy. Your data stays on your
device. Nobody else sees it. Nobody else
stores it. In a world where data privacy
is becoming a massive deal, this is
everything. Two, speed. When AI runs
locally, there is no lag from sending
data to a server and waiting for a
response. It is instant or close to
instant. Three, access. You do not need
internet. You do not need expensive
cloud services. You just need a device
with a browser that opens up AI to so
many more people around the world. And
that is what makes this translate Gemma
4B release so important. It is not just
a translation model. It is proof that
powerful AI can run anywhere on any
device in any browser without any cloud
without any server. If you want to try
it yourself, you can grab the model from
HuggingFace, Kaggle or Vert.Ex AI. It is
open. It is free to download and
developers are already building some
incredible things with it. Now, here is
what I want you to think about. We are
still so early in this shift.
browser-based AI, local AI, offline AI.
This is just the beginning. A year from
now, the stuff running in your browser
is going to blow your mind. And the
people who start learning this now are
the ones who are going to be ahead of
everyone else. So, here's what I want
you to do. First, drop a comment below
and tell me what language you would
translate first with this tool. Julian
reads every single comment and I want to
hear from you. Second, if you want to
learn how to use AI tools like Translate
Gemma to automate your translation
workflows, build smarter apps, and scale
your business with AI, join the AI
profit boardroom. Link is in the
description. We break down every major
AI update. We show you exactly how to
use them, and you get access to a
community that is on the cutting edge of
AI automation. And if you want the full
process, S&Ps and over 100 AI use cases
like this one, join the AI success lab
links in the comments and description.
You will get all the video notes from
there, plus access to our community of
38,000 members who are crushing it with
AI. AI that runs in your browser, no
cloud, no servers, no data sharing, 55
languages, offline, private. And this is
probably just the beginning. I will see
you in the next